# hp_caller

Requirements:

samtools v0.1.19+

Perl v5.12
- Math::Round
- Math::BigInt
- Math::BigFloat

Usage:

1) Index your reference fasta sequence using samtools faidx. 

samtools faidx REFSEQ.fasta 

2) Find the homopolymers in your reference sequence. You can use the perl script I wrote (hp_finder_BED.pl), or you can use something else. The resulting bed file should have the tab-separated columns CHROM START END HP SCORE STRAND where "HP" is A:8 for the sequence AAAAAAAA It doesn't matter what you put for the score.

hp_finder_BED.pl < REFSEQ.fasta > HOMOPOLYMERS.bed 

3) Run the aggregator script, hp_aggregator.pl. 

hp_aggregator.pl --bedfile HOMOPOLYMERS.bed --refseq REFSEQ.fasta --bamfiles ./*.bam > DATA_FILE.agg

Note that hp_aggregator.pl keeps everything in memory before writing the output data. If you have a large genome or many bamfiles you may run out of memory. Break your bed file up into several smaller bed files if you have this problem. You can put all the variant calls into one file at the end.  

4) Run hp_caller to call variants. Minimal syntax is:

hp_caller.pl -v DATA_FILE.agg > VARIANTS.vcf 

An example command line with all option parameters specified: 

hp_caller.pl -v DATA_FILE.agg --min_sdp 5 --max_sdp 150 --nsr 1 --uncallable 3 --loc_min 200 --loc_max 2500 -mp 5 --asymmetry 0.2 --minSGQ 10 --minLQ 10 --variants_only > VARIANTS.vcf

Meaning of the options for hp_caller:

--min_sdp [integer >=3]
	Describes the minimum depth requirement for a sample to be callable.

--max_sdp [integer] 
	Describes the maximum sample read depth for a sample to be callable. With many reads at a locus, a binomial probability calculation is not required; the sample can simply be called according to the mode of its distribution. The time required for the calculation scales with the number of reads in the sample. Additionally, floating point errors may result if sample depth is too high. 

--nsr [integer]
	Net supporting reads, the number of reads supporting one hypothetical length vs. the next most likely hypothetical length. Default is 1; is redundant with sample QUAL score. If set to 5, there must be 5 more reads supporting the hypothesis that the homopolymer is of length L1 vs. than 
the hypothesis that the homopolymer is of length L2. 

--uncallable [integer]
	The maximum number of uncallable samples at a locus before the entire locus is considered uncallable. 

--loc_min [integer]
	The minimum number of reads required for a locus to be considered callable. Recommended not to be set below 50. 

--loc_max [integer] 
	The maximum number of reads at which to attempt calling the locus; default 2500. This is used to avoid calling at repetitive loci with artificially elevated coverage with respect to the rest of the genome. 

-mp [integer]
	PHRED scaled probability that the sample has a different genotype than the locus. Default 5, or 10^-5. 

--asymmetry [fraction greater than zero and less than 1]
	Maximum fractional asymmetry around the mode in a distribution. Default 0.2. If a sample or locus distribution has greater asymmetry than this threshold, the sample or locus will not be called.

--variants_only
	If this option is specified, only loci with variants will be output. By default all loci are  output regardless of whether a variant is present. 

--minSGQ [integer]
	Default 10. Minimum sample distribution quality score for callable samples. Samples with quality scores less than this threshold will not be called. Note that this quality score is not the same as the QUAL score computed by samtools. 

--minLQ [integer]
	Default 10. Minimum locus distribution quality score for callable loci. No samples will be called at loci with quality scores less than this threshold. Note that this quality score is not the same as the QUAL score computed by samtools.



The output data file generated by hp_caller is very similar to the VCF 4.1 file format though it does not strictly adhere to the specification. 

Output data file format:
Column 0:	CHROM. The chromosome.
Column 1:	POS. The 1-based position on the chromosome. 
Column 2:	ID. hp_caller fills this with the null value "." for everything.
Column 3:	REF. Allele in the reference genome sequence. This is assigned allele number 0 in the output genotypes. 
Column 4:	ALT. Sequences of variant alleles. The first allele listed is allele number 1, etc. 
Column 5:	QUAL field. This is the locus distribution quality score calculated by hp_caller. hp_caller uses the QUAL field of the vcf file to store this value for convenience even though it is not the same as a QUAL score calculated by samtools. Values in this field range from 1-100 with higher numbers indicating higher confidence in the locus genotype. 
Column 6:	FILTER. hp_caller does not use this field and fills it with "." for everything. 
Column 7:	INFO. hp_caller outputs a number of parameters in this field:
	MODE	The mode of the locus distribution.
	DP4	The total number of reads in the locus distribution. As these reads necessarily span the entire locus, it is more like the samtools "DP4" or high quality reads parameter than it is like the samtools "DP" parameter.
	HIST	A stringified version of the locus histogram. The string "7,25;8,600;9,2;" indicates 25 reads with length 7, 600 reads with length 8, and 2 reads with length 9. 
Column 8:	FORMAT. A list of parameters reported in the individual genotype fields. 
	GT	Genotype. hp_caller only calls haploids. But it reports genotypes as if they were diploid, so this will always be of the format "0/0", "1/1", etc.
	MODE	Mode of the sample distribution.
	DP	Total number of reads in the sample distribution.
	GQ	Sample distribution quality score. This is not the same as a samtools QUAL score but it functions similarly, ranging from 0-100 with higher numbers indicating higher confidence.
	MP	Mutant probability. Probability that the sample has a different genotype than the locus average. 
	HIST	A stringified histogram as in Column 7.
Remaining columns: Sample data fields. 
	

************
These scripts are intended as proof of concept rather than as tools ready to drop into a pipeline. 


You can reach me at @dangenet on Twitter or github. 

